SundaySOUP
A How-To Guide to Thinking through Micro-granting Dinners
amy kaherl revised: april, 2013

licence: ?

see illustrated version:
http://detroitsoup.com/startyourown/

INTRODUCTION
Welcome to a wonderful world of the micro-granting dinner!
Detroit SOUP was founded in the Mexicantown neighborhood of Detroit in February 2010 by Kate Daughdrill and Jessica Hernandez. The idea was taken from InCUBATE (“a research group dedicated to exploring new approaches to arts administration and arts funding” www.incubate-chicago.org) who started the idea in neighborhood in Chicago.

SOUP is..a collaborative situation
a public dinner
a platform for connection
a theatrical environment
a democratic experiment in micro-funding
a relational hub bringing together various creative communities
a forum for critical but accessible discussion
an opportunity to support creative people in Detroit

Beginnings:
At our first dinner proposals where not shared. A small group of people (no more than 40)
gathered together for a meal and began to envision the idea of SOUP in a loft above the
Mexicantown Bakery. By April we had our first winner (a Rust Belt Architecture photo book) and
started getting traction, proposals, and community members to gather, interact, share not only a
meal but who they are as people (passions, gifts, ideas, visions for the city, resources, values,
etc.) at the dinner.
In year two we slowed down a bit, meeting every other month and realizing the project was
making a large impact on the people, projects, and passions of Detroiters. We moved into the
Corktown neighborhood and ran the dinner out of a warehouse. We choose this location
because of the raw nature of the space. Raw spaces allow for raw ideas to find a home!
The Present
In just three short years we have grown! We average about 225 people at each dinner and have
found a permanent home in the Jam Handy Building on E. Grand Blvd, just north of Midtown.
The project has moved from funding artists to a wide variety of community members that need a
little money to start their projects.

IMPACT:
We have witnessed Detroiters give back to Detroiters over $25,000 to get their ideas to the next
level. Five of these groups are forming their own non-profits, and one has formed a Michigan
LC3 business. Parks have been cleaned, art has been created, collaborations have formed, and
justice has been moved one step farther. Beyond the financial impact we have watched the
invaluable resource of connecting. We are a witness and participant in human interaction.
Sharing values and hope for the future of the city. We have witnessed a couple meeting and
getting married, people have formed new relationships and partnerships, creative collaboration
is happening after meeting at SOUP, new opportunities are forming, and people have a place to
share passions and dreams in a safe space.
Detroit is changing. Slowly. And that’s important. We cannot afford to rush to change things. We
need to be deliberate, and passionate, and kind. Detroit needs to consider our past while rising
up a new generation of changemakers. We can not do it alone and we need one another. SOUP
offers this opportunity. We hope that you can help be a part of this community dialogue and
share your voice at SOUP.
SOUP has been a recipient of a large grant from the Knight Foundation to move the idea into
neighborhoods around the city. We are slowly building partnerships around the city to build this
idea into the fabric of the city.
I hope that this small manual helps you think through why you would want to do a micro- granting dinner in your neighborhood and or city. We hope that our journey helps you think through and problem solve as you embark on your own.
Good Luck!
Amy Kaherl | Detroit SOUP
www.detroitsoup.com amy@detroitsoup.com facebook.com/detroitsoup Twitter: @DetroitSOUP
	
   	
::BEGINNINGS::
(photo by Dave Lewinski)
It really does take a village to create and sustain SOUP. Nothing creates burnout than doing it alone. You want a network of collaborators! Don’t do this alone! Think Friends, partners, co- collaborators! Find people you trust to work with you to get this off the ground.
People to Think About Having on Your Team:
Designers Artists Thinkers Event Planners Businessmen/women Web Designer
Photographer Language Translators City Council Members Social Media and Marketing Natural Networkers and Connectors Chefs
We found people that were passionate about (re)imagining the city together. They are artists, urban farmers, social entrepreneurs, advocates and educators. Having a diverse group of people enriches the dinner and draws from outside of your personal network. It can be a beautiful representation of your community.
This dinner is not a one time only event. Do the first one as an experiment. Grow slowly. Fail. Rethink possibilities. Think of this as a sincere way of getting folks together in a room. Each dinner will be different because each dinner will have new people at the tables. How often did you hear about an awesome event after it happened and wished you could have been there? Allow for that feeling in others and create future opportunities for people to participate.
Dinner Calendar
Ask the team these questions: How often do you want to put on the dinner? Monthly? Quarterly? Seasonal? Important to know: There is no perfect day of the week. There is no perfect time. There is always something that will come up (a test, family obligations, vacation, children, other events, rain, snow, illnesses, the season finale of Game of Thrones) but don’t let that stop you. Just pick something and stick with it, people will slowly pay attention!
As you think of the timing, think through these tidbits: ●	Detroit SOUP started thinking that SOUP should happen on the first Sunday of the
month. This was something that sounded nice in theory but we ended up having to move the dinner date because of Super Bowl Sunday, Memorial Day, 4th of July, and Labor Day weekends. If you find that the second Friday or Third Thursdays works stick with it In our third year I have found picking dates and communicating them ahead of time has helped us think through the community calendar and find what works for all involved and invested.
●	If you choose to do a monthly dinner know that it is A LOT OF WORK. You are always in planning mode. When the last dinner is complete the next months is just a short 25 days away. Every eight to ten weeks could be a good way to begin planning for the dinners.
●	Having a web presence allows people to see when the dates are going to be. Share the dates and stick with them. It allows for people to put it on their calendars.
●	The more you do something the more the word will spread!
RSVPs
Detroit SOUP doe not have a system where we take reservations or have people pay online. Detroiters are not so much an RSVP kind of crowd. I think it helps logistically to plan for a certain number based on past attendance, what kind of flyering and social media we have done, and if there is a Facebook event double the number of the people who say they are coming. Remember the people proposing will bring their friends and support system that is a naturally built in audience.
If you choose to do an RSVP there are online ticketing groups with Eventbrite and Brown Paper Tickets. These services allow you to get a head count without having to pay beforehand.
	

:: LOCATION ::
Finding the right location is the part of our project we get the most questions on.
I feel the need to share with you a little history of Detroit with you. Right now we are in a postindustrial culture and there are a lot of vacant buildings that can be turned into a gathering space. Detroit SOUP continues to partner with building owners to utilize these raw spaces. SOUP started in a loft space above a friend’s bakery. The loft was being used for storage and the founders of the dinner took the time to clean up and rehab the space. Within a year it was being used for concerts, exercise groups, parties, and SOUP. We outgrew the bakery loft and moved to a warehouse space without access to a sink or a kitchen. The rent was cheap but the facility lacked heat and great lighting but we made it work. Currently we are now in an old film studio. We are working very close with the building owner and helped raise money to install heat, electrical, and new lighting. We want “The Jam Handy” (pictured above) to feel like a home
that we can grow in! It allows for large-scale installations to be created, music, interesting lighting schemes, and storage for our belongings.
As you start planning your dinner think about how many people you want at future dinners, not just the first. Find a space where lots of diverse people can meet. Think outside of the box. It could be the basement of a church or synagogue. It could be the showroom of a car dealership. It could an old warehouse. Maybe it’s a restaurant who is willing to close down their operations for the night and be the place where you can meet. Each place offers it’s own opportunities and drawbacks. You know your community and your neighborhood partners. Think about the intentions behind the dinner and try to find a space that mimics that. Form follows function.

When you look for a space ask yourself these questions:
Do you want a permanent space or a travelling location? Will your dinner be geared towards the city overall or a specific neighborhood? Do you want to showcase different spaces and places or do you want a permanent home?
There are pros and cons to both but whatever you choose you might want to ask yourself certain questions:
●	Does it have a bathroom? Make sure that whatever you find that there are restroom facilities available.
●	Does it have a sink facility to wash dishes and silverware? This helps with thinking if you would like to use ceramic dishes and metal silverware or you would be purchasing paper bowls, plates, and plastic silverware?
●	What kind of seating opportunities does it have? Do you want high top tables for people to stand around? Do you want people to sit like at a banquet? (probably not) Do you want people to sit in chairs? Do you want to sit on the floor?
The intention of Detroit SOUP is to bring people together. Yes you are raising money but it can be so much more than that. SOUP strives to create environments that draw people into conversation and exchange. We recognize that the floor may not be the most comfortable but I think people are willing to do that for a small amount of time. It allows for people to squeeze

together around tables and engage in an environment that isn’t something that you normally do. Remember why you are providing this dinner. I do this in Detroit so that people make new relationships and be able to share what they are doing in the community.
•	Do you want or need a kitchen facility? Having a kitchen facility could mean that people from the community could make the soup and or salad together the day of the soup at your location. Again it emphasizes our desire for people getting together. We here in Detroit have never had one but if the space is available to you that might be a really great option! It also allows for the soup to stay warm up until serving.
:: THE MEAL ::
(photo by Vanessa Miller)
The soup and salad are the entry point for people to have a shared experience. All throughout time people from all over the world sit together and have a meal. It’s a universal experience and it helps make people comfortable when they are introduced to something new while being surrounded with things that are familiar. Soup is an inexpensive meal that can feed a lot of people.
The meal acts as a gesture. We want to have people feel safe with something they understand but as a community dinner we want to practice sharing. Having a meal is an entry point to sharing. The diners might not leave full with the food but full because you share in a meaningful experience. We use soup and salad because it is universal. It has less of a niche culture (like
8
beer, wine, or coffee) and allows people not to feel like they need to be an expert in these areas to engage in a dialogue. Detroit SOUP always has soup, salad, and bread.
Soup: At least one soup is always vegan. When we began we had one soup maker and this soup would feed about 50-75 people. As more people started to attend we realized that one person making all the food was a large favor to ask. Now we divide the duties and multiple people make our soups and salad. We have a lot of different options now and they range from vegan to carnivorous.
We have asked friends, local growers, backyard gardeners, local businesses, SOUP participants (we have a signup list at the door), and restaurant startups to either donate or be reimbursed for their contribution. For a 250 people at the dinner we offer a $50 stipend to cover the cost of the soup, $25 for the salad. We prefer when people donate to the dinner as to keep our costs low but it’s always important to offer a reimbursement to those who wish to help out.
(Photo by Dave Lewinski)
Bread: We have partnered with Avalon Bakery (www.avalonbakery.com) who allows us to pick up multiple bags of day old bread. We cut up the bread and add some of the bread on the tables for people to eat before the presentations and also on our food table.
Desserts: We have a friend who wanted pie at the dinners so he started making them and sharing with the other diners. He is a magical friend and a huge part of the SOUP support system. People over the dinners have brought desserts as a part of contributing and donating to the dinner! It’s really lovely.

Beverages: We set up a small bar that covers the costs of the dinner so that we wouldn’t have to take funds from the door. We ask a suggested donation for the beer/wine (about $2/$3) and $1/$2 for bottled water or soda. When all of the costs are covered we give the rest of the money to the winner.
Dinner Cost
Detroit SOUP costs $5. There are many other SOUP/FEAST (Funding Emerging Artists through Sustainable Tactics) dinners throughout the country and there are MANY different ways to charge for the dinner. In Detroit there are large barriers to entry for the dinner. Many of our neighbors are far below the poverty line and paying more than $5 is cost prohibitive. Some dinners are on a sliding scale asking for anything between $5-$25. Some groups want to raise more money but can’t have a large amount of people in the space. On average groups ask for $10. The larger the cost the more it can pay for the dinner, you can include beverages in the dinner price, etc.


Dinnerware: When we began we use ceramic dishes. We asked people to donate old dishes and rifled through thrift stores to find all of our plating and silverware. It added a nice design element to the project and it is less wasteful. Overtime we outgrew the number of dishes we had and needed to move over to paper. In our neighborhood we have a friend who makes biodegradable products that can be composted. In our new location we do not have access to a sink that could wash the dishes. It is a cost that I am happy to pay because it helps so much with the idea that the dinner can grow.

::PROJECTS AND PROPOSALS::

Proposals
Who could use a little bit of money to get their project off the ground? We asked friends who were artists to share their ideas first but then the project took off and people who are involved with social justice, urban agriculture, social entrepreneurs, and education began to share their ideas as well. People don’t have to just fit in one category but multiple are proposing.
When we began the grant was between $100-300. It took us time to build to the large dollar amounts ($1500-2000). I think it was great for the community to have even the smaller amount at first. New ideas need to be tested so this dinner provides the opportunity to see if these ideas will work within the city.
We ask the following questions:
Applicant Name:
Applicant Email:
Project Name:
Project Summary:
How will you use SOUP grant funding ($700-900) towards the realization of your project?
Why does this project matter to the Detroit community?
What is the time frame for your project, and how could you share about its progress/completion at an
upcoming SOUP?

The deadline is always the Sunday (or week) before the dinner. We take the proposals and put them into a packet so people have something to read when they enter the dinner. If we have more than four proposals than I work with my group (about 10 people who have been a part of the project for a significant amount of time and know how people have voted in the past). I want to keep this as crowdsourced as we can. If the project isn’t selected we always encourage people to apply again. Within a couple of dinners usually everyone gets a chance to share.
When you begin seeking ideas think about having at least two proposals at your first dinner. As we have grown we started capping at four proposals. We did this because after four presentations people stopped paying attention and the diners got a little restless. Conversations about the projects are easier with only four ideas.
Proposal Packets: Our packets include the answers from the presentations that were submitted. We don’t print out the proposals for every person that enters the dinner. The packets are meant to be shared with people around the tables. It’s a nice piece that people can take with them, be a conversation starter, and something to read before the proposals begin so people feel a bit prepped on what they are about to hear.
We have a graphic designer as part of our team that designs the packets. The last page is a perfect way to say thank you to the people who have made our food and who has volunteered their time and talents.
Thank you page example:
SOUP: SALAD: BREAD: SOUP SPACE: ART: ADDITIONAL THANKS TO: {Insert Volunteers Names Here} 	
	
   	

Communicating to Presenters:
I think communicating things up front is very important. This is our email we send to SOUP Presenters so they know what is going on the day of.
Congratulations!
   	
	
Your project has been selected to present at the Detroit SOUP on Sunday,.
We are so excited that you will be sharing your story with us.
The Event Details:
Sunday, April 14, 2013
2900 E. Grand Blvd.
Detroit, Mi 48202
$5 for soup, salad, bread, and a vote!
Doors at 6:00pm
Proposals presented at 7:00pm
Dinner around 7:45pm
Winner announced about 8:30
Parking can be found on E. Grand Blvd or Horton Street.
Presenting Details:
You will have four minutes to share your idea and have four minutes to take
questions from the diners. At about the 3:30 mark I will politely come into
eyeshot and let you know we need to wrap it up.
	
Your proposal answers will be printed and on tables for people to read prior to
the presentation. This doesn't mean that everyone will see it so please note in
your presentation to hit on these points:
Who you are
What is your project
What you will do with the money
	
• • •
As always, we do not use technology so if you want to use props they need to
be everything but a powerpoint or something where a projector or sound
would be needed.
Please let the gentleman at the door that you are presenting and have them
point me out to you so I know you are in the building and we can
communicate prior to the event and I can answer any last questions.
Sharing Event:
Feel free to let people know what is happening! Please feel free to share our
facebook event:
(insert link here)
or direct people to www.detroitsoup.com,
especially the FAQ section if they have not experienced a dinner before. If
you tweet please direct people to @DetroitSOUP!
:


:VOTING::
(Photo by Dave Lewinski)
Ballots:. We use strips of paper with all four options and people circle the project they hope wins the money. They then put it into a voting box. I have seen other soup dinners give out tokens, tickets, beans, rocks, etc. as a way to vote for each project. Voters would use the item and drop it into a box, basket, canister or bin to vote.
We do not man the voting booth. You do not have to be 18 years old to vote. You do not have to live in the city. We make sure to challenge the dinners to think about this as a contract to one another to only vote once. I am sure it has been taken advantage of but overall I think this has been a great system!


We do have a voting booth where people walk in and independently cast their ballot. We have moved this beast a few times but having a permanent location allows us to have a permanent structure to cast the vote!
::FACILITATING THE DINNER::
Flow of the Night
We start our dinner at 6:30 and that allows about an hour to arrive, find a seat, meet someone new, grab a drink, etc. At 7:30 we begin our short sharing session. Amy share the history of SOUP, welcomes people to the space, and give the run down of the night. Following this we have the four presenters share their idea with the diners. They get no more than 4 minutes to share their idea and then the floor is opened to have four questions posed to. When the presentations are over we invite all the people who have made food to share what they made, if there is anything allergy wise to be aware of, and if they are involved in a project in the community that they want to share. (It becomes a great way to share projects that are happening)! At this point our voting booth opens and lines for dinner begin. About 8:45 we close the voting booth, tally the votes and announce our winner! It really is that simple. Often before we announce the winner of that night we bring back past winners and share how they have used the money. It’s a great accountability but also news piece that we can document on how the money is being used.
Technology
We don’t use technology (powerpoint or video) at the dinner. Because the presentations are so short we want to hear from people and their ideas. Sometimes technology can be a crutch and not everyone has access to these products. Plus how often have you been somewhere and the technology isn’t working or you brought a PC and it’s only Mac compatible. Not using technology wipes away those issues and avoids technical difficulties!

Proposals Before Dinner: We used to do the dinner first and then the proposals but we found that people don’t talk about the projects as much if they eat before listening. I have noticed that when people come into the space they don’t normally talk with the people they didn’t come with. Guests will play on their phones, read the proposals at the table, or talk with just the people they came with. As we wished to have people engage in conversation we moved the dinner after proposal sharing. People were more apt to have a conversation and share why this project would be better for Detroit after the flip flop. We found that people talk more, connect, share, and engage. We have witnessed a couple meet and get married, people receive jobs, share resources, collaborate on projects, and people give money to projects that weren’t funded by the dinner pot! The dinner is a magical safe space for gathering!
Winners: There are a lot of ways of doing this but we have decided to only have one group win the money. It’s the power and practice of democracy and we are just practicing it on a monthly basis. We have been asked to split up the money four ways but we think there is power in completing and engaging with the project with $700 rather than $150. There is power in that bigger number!
When we count up the ballots we give the winners a chunk of money. We learned that if we have an envelope handy than they have something to take home all that money in. It’s helpful. We also ask them to come back in a couple of months and share how they have used the money. Sometimes two months is a quick turn around so the three or four month mark also works well. We love this part as it helps winners stay accountable to the process. This can be hard though as people have different schedules and plans. Make a note to have them come back and share, and only for a couple of minutes.

::LOGISTICS::
(photo by Vanessa Miller)
Advertising:
So how do you get people at the event?
We began with asking friends to join us. We started a simple facebook event page and invited people in our network to this. As we grew we started a Facebook group and our website. The site helps in making a local point for people to find our information. Over time we grew into a Twitter site and a Facebook page. We were also lucky to be connected with our local weekly paper called Real Detroit Weekly that within the first couple of months did a story on the dinner, a few months later we happened to be involved in a story about art in the New York Times. SOUP gained traction and grew out of that and we have been very lucky to be featured in a wide array of local and national press. BUT the best thing about the dinner is thinking not about the press but about shaping a positive experience for people to have an amazing experience. I would rather have word of mouth any day of the week because that really connects our neighbors to the dinner. You naturally have guests because the people proposing will bring people along.
What to Expect in Planning
There are a lot of people that you will be communicating with so with a team of people you might want to break the responsibilities down into different sections. Having someone in charge of the dinner and bar, someone in charge of proposals, and someone to deal with communication would be a way to divide and conquer the project. Having a leader to oversee Everything to make sure everyone is on task and the list is getting conquered!
To run the project takes work. It takes time. You will be volunteering at least 20 hours a month to run a project. If you split up the work it takes a lot less time per person to make it happen. At first there will be a lot of emails with different people in the community. Hopefully you will be getting some press to share with your neighbors and community. This person needs to make sure they can share the vision clearly with the diners and future guests!
Detroit SOUP has found itself doing a lot of outreach to a lot of different groups. We talked (and continue to talk with) local colleges, business collaborators, social groups, and neighborhood alliances to share the opportunity to win some money and share their idea at the dinner.
Tax Structure
Becoming a non-profit is ALOT of work and unnecessary to begin the project. Because the money is so little from each person we haven’t found a reason to become our own 501(c)3 nonprofit. The dinner acts as a middleman between the diners and the winner. We provide the space for people to offer their donation to a creative or social project in the city.
Detroit SOUP has now partnered with a local nonprofit, Cityscape Detroit, that acts as a fiduciary sponsor and allows us time at board meetings to discuss potential issues or approval of funds.
Volunteers
Detroit SOUP can’t happen alone. Like I said in the beginning of this little manual you will want people to help you with this. You want people to help you set up and tear down the space. You will need to make sure that people are helping man the food line, the bar, and the door. Have someone that likes people and will make people feel safe when they walk into the dinner. Have people feel welcome.
We normally have a simple piece of paper at our table by the door for people to sign up to make a soup or a salad in the future. It helps us know who is interested in making food and participating with the event.

Engaging with Local Art and Artists
Detroit SOUP started as an art project as a way to engage in the community. Often times we find new ways to play with design, installations, and floor coverings. We have had local poets, authors, dancers, photographers and musicians come into the space and share their work. It’s important to me that artists get to share their art with the diners. We want our space to be a safe and inclusive environment, open to all people who want to engage in new projects in the community. Finding ways to share the work of local artists is a great way to add programming elements to the dinner that really enhances the night.
Using the Internet to Support Your Dinner
Website: We love our website! It helps us share the project both past and present. It has a wonderful FAQ section saving hours towards answering the same questions over and over. We have a section of photos that people can see what to expect when they come to the dinner. It has our proposals, and our past winner information. It is pretty simple but we have found that at least 1000 people visit the website a week.
Facebook: Staying connected with facebook is great. Often if we can’t find people to make soup or salads we seek it out on facebook and people step up to the plate. We use the event section to share our event and post often about when it is coming up. We encourage other people to share the event with their social network. We also use it to have the proposers share the dinner with their network with the event link. Also, a couple of days before the dinner we post the event and it is just a little reminder that it is coming up.

Twitter: We also set up a Twitter feed that seems to be more active than our facebook page lately. It helps when people want to live tweet the event, share photos, let people know about future dinners, and have people connect to the daily happenings of soup.
Email Group: We have set up a mail chimp account and that helps us to collect emails. We always send out monthly emails and moved to a newsletter that updates on past winners, future dinners, and any news we wish to share.
The Global SOUP community
There is a wonderful website that engages SOUPs all throughout the world. Head over to www.sundaysoup.org to see if there is already a SOUP dinner in your neighborhood or city. SOUPs come in many different varieties (FEAST, Steak, Stock,Picnic, Spread, etc.). It’s a good way to connect your dinner with the broad reach and connect with the network!
Stay Connected:
We love to hear your story and aid in helping people with starting their dinners. You can email us at amy@detroitsoup.com you can find updated information at www.detroitsoup.com, or facebook: www.facebook.com/detroitsoup or follow us on twitter www.twitter.com/DetroitSOUP

SOUP dinner:
SOUP Checklist DAY OF/WEEK OF...
Do we have at least two soup and salad makers? Do they need reimbursement? $50 for soup/$25 for salad
Do we have bowls, plates, spoons and forks, cups, napkins? Do we have the serving utensils? Do we have table cloths for the serving table? Do we have beer/wine for the bar?
Did we pick up the bread from Avalon? ●	(Saturday it closes at 6pm and Sunday at 4pm. Be there right at that time and ask for
day old bread)
Tables:
Do we have tealights? Can we light the tall table candles? Do we have newspaper for easy cleanup for doors/’tables’? Do we have enough milk crates for the doors?
Environment:
Do we have the sound system? Did we get an artist for the evening? Are there design elements that we can add?
Door:
Do we have an envelope or pot to collect money? Do we have the email sign up sheets? Do we have a list so people can sign up to make soup/salad at a future event?
TWO/THREE WEEKS BEFORE EVENT
Social Media/Connecting
Have we set up an event on facebook? Have we emailed the google group? Have we tweeted about it?
Proposals (due the Sunday before the dinner)
Do we have proposals? ●	If there are more than four did you make a surveymokey?

○	The surveymonkey has a brief synopsis of the project and what they would do with the money.
Do we have them copied? Have we made ballots and put them in the voting booth?
Environment
Have we started contacting artists for the event? Do we have soup and salad makers?
We have a shared google doc with a list of volunteers...
